# Operating System

## Stack
* x86-64 = EMT64 = AMD64
* + [difference-between-EMT64-AMD64](https://superuser.com/questions/383711/whats-the-difference-between-intel-64-and-amd64)
* stack
* + pushl / popl
```
save register (caller saved: %eax/%edx/%ecx/r8/r9/r10/r11/conditional flags)
arguments
return addr (added by call)
old ebp
saved register (callee saved: %ebx/%esi/%edi/r12/r13/r14/r15/%ebp/%esp)
local variables
```
* [special-registers-xs](https://reverseengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/2006/how-are-the-segment-registers-fs-gs-cs-ss-ds-es-used-in-linux)

## Exception
* [CPU-Int-Table](https://wiki.osdev.org/Exceptions)
* trap (int 3 / OxCC): ++EIP
> Traps are reported immediately after the execution of the trapping instruction. A trap is an exception that is reported immediately following the execution of the trapping instruction. Traps allow execution of a program or task to be continued without loss of program continuity. The return address for the trap handler points to the instruction to be executed after the trapping instruction.
* + [Windows-consider-INT3-single-byte-and-decrement-EIP-by-1](http://www.triplefault.io/2017/08/detecting-debuggers-by-abusing-bad.html)
* fault: EIP sames
> These can be corrected and the program may continue as if nothing happened. A fault is an exception that can generally be corrected and that, once corrected, allows the program to be restarted with no loss of continuity. When a fault is reported, the processor restores the machine state to the state prior to the beginning of execution of the faulting instruction. The return address (saved contents of the CS and EIP registers) for the fault handler points to the faulting instruction, rather than to the instruction following the faulting instruction.
* abort
> Some severe unrecoverable error.
* interrupt (programmable, syscall 0x80)
> Interrupts occur at random times during the execution of a program, in response to signals from hardware. System hardware uses interrupts to handle events external to the processor, such as requests to service peripheral devices. Software can also generate interrupts by executing the INT n instruction.
```
Kernel stack:
    Register status (pushal)
    EFLAGS
    CS
    EIP
    Error Code
Call Handler
IRET
```
* + interrupt masking
* + non-maskable interrupt
* + software interrupt => hardware interrupt (PIC programmable interrupt controller)

## Process
* birth
* + execve(path, argv[], envp[])
* + - transfer argv/envp to top of new stack
* + - make stack frame for crt startup
* + - set registers (bp,sp / cs,ip)
* + spawn()
* + rfork() / clone()
* work
* + running/blocked (IO/sleep)/Runnable/Forking/Zombie
* death
* + exit(int)
* + kill(pid, sig)
* cleanup
* + close files
* + release memory
* special
* + orphan process: an orphan process is a computer process whose parent process has finished or terminated, though it remains running itself. (ppid -> 1)
* + zombie process: a zombie process or defunct process is a process that has completed execution but still has an entry in the process table.
* + daemon process: a daemon is a computer program that runs as a background process, rather than being under the direct control of an interactive user.
* + [reference](https://www.cnblogs.com/Anker/p/3271773.html)
* PCB
* + pointer to CPU register save area
* + pid, ppid
* + countdown timer
* + memory segment info
* + scheduler info
* Segment
* + register: %xs
* + selector: content of %xs
* + descriptor: definition of segment (in GDT/LDT)

## Thread
* user-space (N:1)
* + just swaps registers
* + maybe blocked by systemcall
* + cooperating with scheduler is hard
* + multiprocessor, how?
* kernel threads (1:1)
* + kernel managed register set
* + multiprocessor can utilitze
* + CPU-hog threads
* + user-space libraries must be rewritten to be thread-safe
* + require more kernel memory
* + - 1 PCB => 1 TCB + N TCB
* + - 1 k-stack => N k-stacks
* many-to-many (M:N)
* + user-thread | kernel threads (CPU)
* thread cancellation
* + asynchronous (immediate)
* + - free stack/registers, stop execution now, hard for GC
* + deferred
* + - register cancellation point, safe
* [setuid,setgid,sticky bit](http://blog.csdn.net/wxbmelisky/article/details/51649343)

## Synchronization
* atomic instruction sequence
* voluntary de-scheduling
* Mutually Exclusive
* + peterson's solution
```c++
boolean want[2] = {false, false};
int turn = 0;

want[i] = true;
turn = j;
while (want[j] && turn == j)
    continue;
...critical section...
want[i] = false;

Assume contrary: two threads in critical section
Both in c.s. implies want[i] == want[j] == true
Thus both while loops exited because “turn != j”
Cannot have (turn == 0 && turn == 1)
     So one exited frst
w.l.o.g., T0 exited frst because “turn ==1” failed
     So turn==0 before turn==1
     So T1 had to set turn==0 before T0 set turn==1
     So T0 could not see turn==0, could not exit loop frst!
```
* + Bakery algorithm (lamport) N-process
```
Phase 1 – Pick a number
     Look at all presently-available numbers
     Add 1 to highest you can find
Phase 2 – Wait until you hold lowest number
     Not strictly true: processes may have same number
     Use process-id as a tie-breaker
     (ticket 7, process 99) > (ticket 7, process 45)
     Your turn when you hold lowest (t,pid)

choosing[i] = true;
number[i] = max(number[0], number[1], ...) + 1;
choosing[i] = false;
for (j = 0; j < n; ++j) {
    while (choosing[j])
        continue;
    while ((number[j] != 0) &&
        ((number[i], i) > (number[j], j)))
        continue;
}
...critical section...
number[i] = 0;
```
* mutex
```c++
// Initialization
int lock_available = 0;
// “Try-lock”
i_won = xchg(&lock_available, 1);
// Spin-wait
while (xchg(&lock_available, 1)
    continue;
// Unlock
xchg(&lock_available, 1); /*expect 0!!*/
```
* + bounded waiting: pass lock on releasing
* + compare-and-swap/test-and-set/LL+SC
* + busy-waiting => uniprocessor problem/multiprocessor scheduler
* conditional variable
```c++
cond_wait(cvar, world_mutex) {
    lock(cvar->mutex);
    enq(cvar->queue, my_thread_id());
    unlock(world_mutex);
    ATOMICALLY {
        unlock(cvar->mutex);
        kernel_please_pause_this_thread();
    }
    lock(world_mutex);
}
···
* yield
```
yield(user-thread-3){
    save registers on stack /* asm(...) */
    tcb->sp = get_esp(); /* asm(...) */
    tcb->pc = &there; /* gcc ext. */
    tcb = findtcb(user-thread-3);
    set_esp(tcb->sp); /* asm(...) */
    jump(tcb->pc); /* asm(...) */
there:
    restore registers from stack /* asm() */
    return;
}
// With eip
yield(user-thread-3){
    save registers on stack
    tcb->sp = get_esp();
    tcb = findtcb(user-thread-3);
    set_esp(tcb->sp);
    restore registers from stack
    return
}
```
* deadlock
* + Banker algorithm
* + claim=>request=>assign
* + global order
* starvation

## VM
* PTE
* + valid
* + protection (rwx)
* + reference
* + dirty
* + PTLR (page table length register)
* page table is sparse list of dense lists => multi-level page table
* + PDE PTE
* segmentation
* TLB
* + context-switch
* + - %cr3 => clear every entry
* + - INVLPG
* + software-managed
* + - TLB exception => OS
```
Instruction ⇒ segment selector
 [PUSHL specifes selector in %SS]
Process ⇒ (selector ⇒ (base,limit) )
 [Global,Local Descriptor Tables]
Segment base, address ⇒ linear address
TLB: linear address ⇒ physical address, or...
Process ⇒ (linear address high ⇒ page table)
Page Table: linear address middle ⇒ frame address
Memory: frame address, offset ⇒ ..
```
```
%cr0 contains powerful system flags that control things like paging, protected mode
%cr1 is reserved (now that’s really interesting)
%cr2 contains the address that caused the last page fault
%cr3 contains the address of the current page directory, as well as a couple paging related flags
%cr4 contains… more flags (not as interesting though)
- Protected mode virtual interrupts?
- Virtual-8086 mode extensions?
```
* Logical =>(segmentation) => Linear =>(Paging) => Physical
* COW
* ZFOD (zero-filled on demand)
* memory-mapped files
* page eviction
* + Old
* + - FIFO/Optimal/LRU
* + LRU Approximation (clock/second-chance)
* + New
* + - ARC (adaptive replacement cache)
* + - CAR (clock with adaptive replacement)
* + - CART (CAR with temporal filtering)
* page buffering
* frame allocation

## Executables
* ELF
```
ELF header (magic number / machine / byte ordering)
Program header table (required for executables) (page size / virtual addresses memory sections)
.text section (code)
.data section (initialized)
.bss section (uninitialized)
.symtab (symbol table)
.rel.txt (relocation for .text)
.rel.data (relocation for .data)
.debug
Section header table (required for relocatables)
```

## Boot
* Ground 0
* + real mode
* + 0xFFFF0 (jump to actual BIOS entry point)
* BIOS
* + Code in read-only memory (EPROM=>EEPROM=>Flash)
* + configure hardware details
* + - RAM refersh rate / bus speed
* + - password
* + - boot device order
* + load OS
* + provides some device drivers
* + POST (power on self test)
* + - scan for crticial resources
* + - - RAM/Graphics card/Disk/Keyboard
* + Boot-Device search
```
Consult saved settings for selected order
- “A: C: G:” (maybe PXE)
Load the first sector from a boot device
- Could be a floppy, hard disk, CDROM
- Without a BIOS, we’d be in a bit of a jam If the last two bytes are AA55, we’re set
Otherwise look somewhere else
- If no luck, strike terror into user's heart:
- “No Operating System Present
```
* + Boot-Sector Launch
```
Boot sector is copied to 0x7C00
Execution is transferred to 0x7C00
Extra step for hard disk or CD-ROM
    • Boot sector (“MBR”) knows about partitions
        • BIOS starts it running at 0x7C00, of course
        • Copies itself elsewhere in memory, jumps there
        • Loads “active” partition's boot sector at 0x7C00
Now we’re executing the boot loader – the first “software” to execute on the PC
```
* Boot Loader
* + GRUB
* + load OS from /boot/kernel.gz
* + - need to understand file system
* + Multi-stage boot loader
* + - BIOS => First sector => Load rest of boot loader => boot menu => switching mode for OS > 1MB => Load done => jump to kernel entry point
* + multiboot specfication
* + - binary spec & entry point
```
0x1badb002
flags
checksum
header_addr
load_addr
load_end_addr
bss_end_addr
entry_addr
```
* PXE (preboot execution environment)
* + DHCP / net boot
* APM (advanced power management)
* + power-critical
* + disk spin-down / display backlight / south bridge / DRAM controller / keyboard
* + power kernel
* ACPI (advanced configuration & power interface)
* + BIOS blacklist
* Mainframes
* + boot loader as a separate machine
* + diagnostics
* + store OS => set PC => turn on ins fetching
* + debugger
* EFI